---
title: Game Project 2 - Human Behaviour Tree
date: 2025-01-20 01:00:00 +01:00
tags: [GP2, Game Project, Behaviour Tree, AI, Unity]
description: A journal entry detailing the development of Human Behaviour Trees for Game Project 2
image: "/assets/img/postHeaders/gp2-humans.png"
---
As part of my responsibilities as a System Programmer in Game Project 2 I was tasked with developing the AI for a group of “herdable” humans. The player can interact with the humans by getting close to the players and luring them, a lot like herding animals in Minecraft. If the player strays too far from the humans they will lose track of the player.

<video class="video-container" controls>
    <source src="/assets/videos/gp2/HumanBehaviour.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

<p style="text-align:center;"><i>Demonstration of Player detection, with detection range in red and forget range in blue.</i></p>

To implement this I chose to develop it on top of a Behaviour Tree structure. Behaviour Trees offer a lot of modularity and flexibility, making it easy to extend and to replace behaviours. This along with the fact that I have previous experience working with Behaviour Trees and greatly enjoy working with them made them a very suitable fit.

My first task was to create the Behaviour Tree structure. Having some experience working with them I began by copying over my files from a previous project. The main classes of the Behaviour Tree are the Behaviour Tree itself, the BlackBoard which is used to store Data and different nodes such as Leaf Nodes, Decorators and Composite Nodes.

```c++
public class BehaviourTree
{
   private Node _rootNode;
   public BlackBoard BlackBoard;


   public BehaviourTree(Composite rootNode)
   {
       BlackBoard = new BlackBoard();

       _rootNode = rootNode;
       _rootNode.PopulateBlackBoard(BlackBoard);
   }


   public void Tick()
   {
       _rootNode.Evaluate();
   }
}
```

The Behaviour Tree is a base C# class which accepts a Composite node such as selector or sequence in its constructor. This way the user of the behaviour tree can create custom nodes and set the rootNode directly through the behaviour trees constructor.

The Human Behaviour Tree consists of three main branches which make up the logic for moving towards a rest space, moving towards the player and looking for the player. For my first iteration I designed it so the Humans simply move towards the player when within a certain range. This worked well enough and combined with the NavMesh stopping distance made sure the humans would not interfere with each other or walk into the player. However one function that was missing were the humans keeping a constant distance from the player. For the game The Last Flame the player is a fiery fox which, like a campfire is nice and warm when observed from afar but getting too close would burn the humans. To implement this behaviour I created a TargetAwayFromPlayer leaf node to make the humans avoid getting too close to the player. This works by getting the direction to the player, normalizing it, taking the negative of it and multiplying it with an adjustable distance from the player.

This made the humans avoid the player getting too close. However without a buffer area where the humans can remain static at a distance from the player this led the humans oscillating between being too close to the player, overshooting and getting too far away from the player. I solved this behaviour by creating a IsWithinRange decorator to stop the humans from moving when they are within a certain range from the player.


<video class="video-container" controls>
    <source src="/assets/videos/gp2/PlayerAvoidance.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

This works by creating a buffer-zone where humans remain static. Within this range the humans NavMeshAgent is turned off, getting closer or further away will cause the humans to either avoid you or walk towards you.

<video class="video-container" controls>
    <source src="/assets/videos/gp2/RestSpace.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

<h2>Human Rest Space</h2>
The purpose of humans in the game is to rescue them and to lead them to the light. In order to show this through gameplay we humans follow the player and made the goal to lead the humans into what we chose to call rest spaces. These rest spaces can be anything from a campfire to a village and consist of rest spots which are places in worldspace a human can go to and occupy. This gives more control for the level designers as they can explicitly choose where the humans should rest after leading them to a rest space.

The human compares distance against these RestSpaces and when it is in range of a RestSpace it calls the GetRandomRestSpot on the RestSpace to get a destination to go to. This is set as the NavMesh target and the player walks over there. When the player arrives at the rest spot its Rest function is called which activates a UnityEvent that activates an idle animation.

```c++
public HumanRestSpot GetRandomRestSpot(Transform reserver)
{
   if (SpotsLeft == 0)
   {
       Debug.LogWarning("No HumanRestSpots left");
       return null;
   }


   HumanRestSpot restSpot = _humanRestSpots.Pop();
   restSpot.Reserve(reserver);


   HumansResting++;

   return restSpot;
}
```

In order to keep track of quest conditions the HumanRestSpace also holds an integer HumansResting, to keep track of how many humans are currently resting at the RestSpace.
